# Release notes

## Version 0.6.3 (2026-01-13)

### Bugfix

* Fix bug that did not show the background map of the topology when exporting to .svg-format.

### Enhancements

* Adjust `descriptive_names` to new elements in `EnergyModelsFlex`.

### Adjustments

* Use `Downloads` instead of `HTTP` to download `.geojson` files. This resolves warning and uses a standard julia library that is faster to load.
* Cleaned up `test/case7.jl`.
* Add a white background to `.svg`-files.

## Version 0.6.2 (2025-12-18)

### Bugfix

* Fix missing header type for type `Int` used in the exported function `save_results` (e.g., for the variable `:discharge_segment` in `EnergyModelsRenewableProducers`).

## Version 0.6.1 (2025-12-17)

### Enhancements

* Improved testing of `descriptive_names` and added more names from other packages.
* Improved documentation.


## Version 0.6.0 (2025-12-15)

### Bugfix

* Added missing descriptive names for the variables `emissions_link`, `link_opex_var`, `link_opex_fixed` and `emissions_trans`.

### Enhancements

* Enabled exporting topo axis to bmp, tif, tiff, jpg, jpeg, and png file format.
* Enable custom boundary background map instead of the default coastlines (through a `.geojson` file location provided by the keyword argument `map_boundary_file` in the `GUI`-function).

### Adjustments

* Adjusted `descriptive_names` to be more robust to available packages. Introduced module names as intermediate `Dict`s in the `structures` field of `descriptive_names` (this is a breaking change).

## Version 0.5.18 (2025-11-24)

### Bugfix

* Fix missing distinction between different `TransmissionMode`s in the "data"-menu by including the `id` field in parentheses.

### Enhancements

* Added the option `pre_plot_sub_components` to the `GUI`-constructor to skip preplotting hidden sub components of an area (the option is by default `true`). The components of an `Area` are then plotted on demand (on the `open` functionality). This greatly enhances performance for large cases.
* Improved general performance.
* Added two new options to the `GUI` constructor: `simplified_connection_plotting` (default `false`) for controlling connection visualization detail, and `simplify_all_levels` (default `false`) for applying simplification across hierarchical levels.

### Adjustments

* Adjusted the calculation of `Connection` plots.
* Added the field `visible` to `EnergySystemDesign` and `Connection` on which plots can directly rely on for visibility
* Adjust behaviour of `Base.show` on the types `EnergySystemDesign`, `Connection` and `AbstractSystem` to correspond to `Base.show` of their corresponding `AbstractElement`.
* Change tests of toggling of colors to be based on a new case having more transmission modes (the case in the new `test/EMI_geography_2.jl` file).
* Make the distance between two way connection linearly dependent on `Δh` instead of a fixed width based on `gui.vars[:two_way_sep_px]`.
* Make the markersize (arrow heads for connections) linearly dependent on `Δh` instead of a fixed size based on `gui.vars[:markersize]`
* Also expand `TransmissionMode`s in the info-box.
* For the labeling, use square brackets around indices in the string construction.

## Version 0.5.17 (2025-11-19)

### Bugfix

* Fix bug that made `Node`s/`Area`s disappear when plotting too many objects (max z_level is 10000).
* Fix square_intersection function.

### Enhancements

* Use `Float32` instead of `Number`/`Real`/`Float64` for coordinate related computations in topo (also `Point2f` instead of `Tuple` and `Vector`).
* Remove redundant `notify_component` function and `Observable`s (use the `@lift` macro instead).
* Improve performance of updates to `ax_info`.
* Add missing tests for show-function on the types `AbstractSystem` and `ProcInvData`, and improve code structure.
* Bumped Makie packages to latest versions (and adjusted the code to the breaking changes) which increased performance.
* Improved code performance.
* Toggeling of GeoMakie is also now available which improves performance if the background map is not required.

# Adjustments

* Skip warnings if a provided non-empty `id_to_icon_map` does not contain icons for all `Node`s/`Area`s (as it is fine to combine custom icon with the default generated icons).
* Introduced the new parametric type `PlotContainer` to replace `Dict{:Symbol, Any}` types used as container for plotted data.

## Version 0.5.16 (2025-09-24)

### Enhancement

* Enable reading model results from files by enabling `model::String` being the directory to the saved files instead of `model::JuMP.Model`. Note that the files can be generated by `EnergyModelsGUI.save_results(model::JuMP.model)`.
* Enhance the descriptive names for nodes having dictionaries with keys of type Resource as in the `MultipleBuildingTypes`-node in `EnergyModelsLanguageInterfaces.jl`.
* Enhance visualization of plots over `OperationalPeriod`s having a constant non-zero value.
* Improved the cross references in the documentation and added how to show results from a model run.

### Adjustment

* Move functions from generating cases from the example files to a single file to enable testing without requiring rerunning the cases.

## Version 0.5.15 (2025-08-07)

### Bugfix

* Fix bug from breaking changes in GLMakie v0.10 on Windows.

## Version 0.5.14 (2025-06-25)

### Bugfix

* Fix bug from breaking changes in GeoMakie v0.7.13 on Windows.
* Don't show warning for unfeasible JuMP solution when the provided model is empty.

## Version 0.5.13 (2025-06-02)

### Bugfix

* Fix bug when `length(get_products(system)) == length(id_to_color_map)` but when `get_products(system)` is not a subset of `keys(id_to_color_map)`. This case did not expand `id_to_color_map` correctly.
* Add missing description of the `case_name` option in the `GUI`-function.
* Add the `EnergyModelsGUI` package in the `Project.toml` file in the examples folder.

### Enhancement

* Added more descriptive names for `EnergyModelsHeat` and `EnergyModelsHydrogen` and add a colors for the `HeatLT` and `HeatHT` resources.

### Adjustment

* Order the colors (by id) in the Resources legend.
* Move boundaries for countries just above the ocean layer.
* Fix default placements of the nodes in a uniform circle (when coordinates are not provided).
* Only create the design-folder if needed.

## Version 0.5.12 (2025-03-09)

### Enhancement

* Enable initiation of the `GUI` with a `Case`-type instead of a `Dict` as introduced in `EnergyModelsBase` v0.9.
* Add `link_cap_inst` field in `descriptive_names.yml`.
* Added more descriptive names for `EnergyModelsRenewableProducers` and add a color for the `Water` resource.
* For resources without assigned colors, avoid foul colors.

### Adjustment

* Create the `EMGExt` extension such that functionality connected to the `EnergyModelsGeography` package is only loaded if `EnergyModelsGeography` is loaded.
* Remove inspector overlay for background map using `GeoMakie`.

## Version 0.5.11 (2025-02-01)

### Bugfix

* Fix bug that occured when providing a color for a `Resource.id` not present in `products` for the `id_to_color_map`-argument of the `GUI`-function.
* Fix the path to the `descriptive_names.yml` file of an EMX package.

## Version 0.5.10 (2024-12-13)

### Bugfix

* Generalize get_element_label to use EMB.Link (instead of Direct)

### Enhancement

* Show objective value in the solution summary.

### Adjustment

* Use the EMB JuliaFormatting setup.

## Version 0.5.9 (2024-11-12)

### Bugfix

* Attemptet fix of the viewbox of the exported svg-file (this should ideally be fixed by Makie-developers). Also added the legend to the export.

### Enhancement

* Added `reset view` button for the results visualization axis.

### Adjustment

* Adjusted the `element` printout to the information axis to include more nested levels.
* Maintain the axis limits, if altered, across the different time plots.

## Version 0.5.8 (2024-10-21)

### Enhancement

* Bump versions of dependencies.

### Adjustment

* Always show legend and title on top for the topology plot.

## Version 0.5.7 (2024-10-09)

### Bugfix

* Fix bug that errored on time-indepentent variables by ignoring these.

## Version 0.5.6 (2024-09-16)

### Bugfix

* Relax requirements of x- and y- coordinate being of same type.

## Version 0.5.5 (2024-09-13)

### Bugfix

* Reorder buttons and menus to enable GUI on low resolution (i.e. [1280, 729]). Divided the text area into two areas (the new one for permanently showing result summary).

## Version 0.5.4 (2024-09-09)

### Bugfix

* Fix incorrect ylabel when using scale_tot_opex=true.

### Enhancement

* Improve performance with a workaround for slicing a JuMP.Containers.SparseAxisArray.
* Enable collect for ::EnergySystemDesign by providing the function length(::EnergySystemDesign).

## Version 0.5.3 (2024-09-02)

### Bugfix

* Fixed bug that showed investment due to machine precision noise by enabeling the user to control the relative threshold for what is considered investment (the `tol` option in the `GUI` function).
* Fixed bug that made it hard to select `EnergySystemDesign` objects in the GUI assosiated with `NetworkNode`s.
* Fixed bug that scaled opex with division instead of multiplication.
* Fixed bug that duplicated nodes having investment in more than one of `level`, `charge` and `discharge` fields.

### Enhancement

* Introduced the abstract type `AbstractGUIObj` as a supertype for `EnergySystemDesign` and `Connection`. This approach enables simple iteration through all of these objects by using multiple dispatch of `Base.iterator`.
* The type `ProcInvData` was introduced for objects of type `AbstractGUIObj` to enable simple storage of what elements are considered to contain investments.
* Enabled box zoom for the results visualization area.

### Adjustment

* The functions `get_system_node` and `get_connection` are now combined to the functions `get_element` using multiple dispatch.
* Recover blue ocean when using `EnergyModelsGeography`.
* The `DataInspector` now shows investment data if investments has occurred when hovering `AbstractGUIObj` objects.
* Dropped printing large vectors to the info box for performance reasons.
* Dropped clearing node selection when clearing all plots in the results visualization area.

## Version 0.5.2 (2024-08-26)

### Bugfix

* Fixed a work around for a bug related to colors on plots not being updated upon selection (due to bug in Makie).
* Fixed bug for plotting `ScenarioProfile`s.
* Fixed bug when selecting periods from the menus for a non-tensorial time structure.
* Fixed bug related to the type `Combined` not longer being used by Makie.
* Fixed bug related to exporting raster graphics of Plots (by using GLMakie instead of CairoMakie).
* Fixed workaround for a bug related to issue [Issue #4266](https://github.com/MakieOrg/Makie.jl/issues/4266) in Makie.
* Fixed bug that disabled `DataInspector` for all plots except plots over `StrategicPeriod`s, deactivated grid and deactivated zooming feature. This fix also improved performance as it required restructuring of the code that resulted in many simplification (mainly that only a single axis is needed for all time categories).

### Enhancement

* The extraction of JuMP data is done during initialization of the GUI to improve performance during use.
* Tests have been improved.

### Feature

* The total opex and capex costs may now be plotted over strategic periods where both quantities may be scaled to a year or the whole strategic period using the boolean input arguments `scale_tot_opex` and `scale_tot_capex`. The calculations are based on the variables listed in `src/descriptive_names.yml` under `total.opex_fields` and `total.capex_fields`. Partly solves [Issue #6](https://github.com/EnergyModelsX/EnergyModelsGUI.jl/issues/6).
* Elements with added investments are now indicated by coloring the label red. What constitutes an added investment is positive values of the variables listed in `src/descriptive_names.yml` under `investment_indicators`. Partly solves [Issue #6](https://github.com/EnergyModelsX/EnergyModelsGUI.jl/issues/6).
* Custom labels (if provided) are now used as x-ticks in the plots.
* Print model results summary in the information box when model contains a feasible solution. Partly solves [Issue #6](https://github.com/EnergyModelsX/EnergyModelsGUI.jl/issues/6).
* A `colormap` may now be provided as input argument to `GUI` for plotting of results.

## Version 0.5.1 (2024-07-24)

### Bugfix

* Fixed error for cases with `OperationalScenario` under `StrategicPeriod`s.

### Enhancement

* Redirect stdout to avoid redundant printouts during testing.
* Create figures for docs and README.md file on the fly (based on current version).
* Rename variables named `type` that is not actually of type `DataTypes` to avoid confusion.
* Scattered the functions from the utils.jl and GUIutils.jl files onto smaller files in the folders `src/utils_gen` and `src/utils_GUI`.
* Updated docstrings.
* Improved code structure.
* Change variable name from `node` to `element` for variables of type `Plotable`.
* Remove redundant `EMB.` and `EMG.` prefixes.
* Simplify the input argument of the function update_limits!.
* Add more comments and clean up `EnergySystemDesign` constructor.
* Introduced functions for accessing fields of types to simplify potential changes in field names and cleaned up code.
* Bump Makie versions to improve CI and performance.
* Improved ylimit handling for plots.
* Improved the code coverage.
* Relaxed redundant minor version specification in the `Project.toml`-file.

### Feature
* Provided the user with the ability to provide descriptive_names in the folder `ext/EMGUIExt/descriptive_names.yml` for a EMX package, and/or
  a user defined file, and/or a user defined Dict.

## Version 0.5.0 (2024-04-19)

### Adjustment

* Adjusted default colors (for resources) to be that of `Matplotlib`.
* Removed empty and/or redundant sheets from excel exports.
* Renamed the `navigate up` button to `back` and moved it to the far left (to get a browser feel). The `open` button was moved correspondingly.
* Plot comonents and lines in layers such that components are uniquely layered on top of each other and always above any line.
* Use dashed linestyle for area components that has nodes with investment.
* For transmissions, only use dashed linestyle if the transmission itself has investments.
* Updated to `EnergyModelsBase`@0.7.0, `EnergyModelsGeography`@0.9.0, `EnergyModelsInvestments`@0.6.0 and `TimeStruct`@0.8.0.
* Restructured how descriptive names are read from the `descriptive_names.yml` file.
* Added the type `Connection` to replace the type `Tuple{EnergySystemDesign,EnergySystemDesign,Dict}`.
* Removed redundant functions, use the `plots` variable naming convention instead of `plot_objs`.

### Bugfix

* Fixed issue of non-updating doges for barplots when removing bars.
* Fixed bug of Wireframes being included in `gui.vars[:visiblePlots]`.
* Fix bug when exporting barplot data to the REPL PrettyTables.
* Fix error when exporting plots to excel files.
* Resolve bug when two components are close together which resulted in singular behaviour.
* Fixed bug for default icon setup for Source with multiple `Resource`s.
* Fixed bug when trying to read model results with `termination_status(gui.model) != MOI.OPTIMAL`.
* Fixed bug that for multiple selected plots did not go back to its original colors when deselected.

### Enhancement

* Code has been formatted using `JuliaFormatter` (with `style = "blue"`).
* Converted variable names form lower camelCase to snake_case (breaking).
* Divided the GUI() function into smaller functions.
* Improved the documentation to include explanation of the functionality of the GUI.
* Added a new example, `case7`, that show case more features of EMX and the GUI.
* Added more tests that focuses on specific GUI functionalities (currently 91.15 % coverage).
* Added .lp and .mps file export options.
* Add `clear all` (button) functionality.

### Feature

* The GUI window can now be closed with the shortcut `ctrl+w`.
* Add functionality to provide own descriptions and extended descriptions to the EnergyModelsRenewableProducers and EnergyModelsHydrogen packages.

## Version 0.4.2 (2024-03-19)

### Bugfix

* Fix issue when aligning selections of node including links/transmissions.
* Fix issue for plotting the topology having `Area`s with only the availability node present.

### Enhancement

* Improved documentation of the `GUI` constructor and provided more optional arguments.
* Improved performance be precomputing the available data for all objects such that choosing from the `Data` menu now performs better.

### Feature

* The fontsize can now be adjusted as an input argument to the `GUI` constructor.

## Version 0.4.1 (2024-03-15)

### Adjustment

* The `print table` functionality is now available through the `export` button with the `REPL` option.
* The `Save` functionality also loops through sub-systems (since changing coordinates of sub-components is enabled through the `Expand all` toggle).

### Bugfix

* Fixed issue with pinned and visible plots not being properly overwritten.
* Fixed issue with setting `expandAll = true` in the input argument for `GUI`.
* Fix issuewith non-existing export folder.

### Feature

* Added functionality to export all JuMP variables to an excel file.
* Added functionality to export all JuMP variables to the REPL using PrettyTables.

## Version 0.4.0 (2024-03-12)

### Adjustment

* For `StrategicPeriods` and `RepresentativePeriods`, plot the object string from the `Base.Show()` function instead of the corresponding integers.
* Removed redundant dependencies in the `Project.toml` file.
* One can now hide decorations (gridlines and ticks) in `axes[:topo]` by using the `GUI` input argument `hideTopoAxDecorations` (default is set to true).
* Use two triangles connected by a juncture for `NetworkNode`s to make the shape different from the circle used for `Sink`s. The left triangle represent input `Resource`s and the right triangle represents output `Resource`s.
* Breaking: Avoided CamelCase naming convention for function to be more alligned with the EMX naming convention.
* Plots are no longer auto selected (user must manually pick from `Available data`) to improve performance.
* Adjusted the tags `Electricity` and `Gas` to be `Power` and `NG` in the `colors.toml` file to be more in line with the EMX exampels..
* Added option to use coarse coastlines (the `coarseCoastlines` is by default set to `true`) for performance.

### Bugfix

* Fix zooming bug in `gui.axes[:info]`.
* Fix issue plotting results over `RepresentativePeriods`.
* Fix bug for modes of type `PipeSimple`.
* Fixed bug of collapsed lines when a connection is not twoWay.
* Fixed bug that did not toggle back highlighting of the "open" button after click.
* Corrected path to EMX packages for icon location (ext/EMGUIExt/icons).
* Fixed 404 issue for high resolution geographical land data.

### Enhancement

* Colors can now be provided as a dict for selected `Resource`s and if not provided the GUI will look through the colors.toml file for colors if same keys are used (otherwise an algorithm will fill in the missing colors based on the provided colors in order to be optimally distinct).
* By default, colors are now extracted automatically from the `src/colors.toml` file based on the `id` of the Resource (effectively removing the need of providing the `idToColorMap` input argument to get decent colors for most examples).
* Icons can now be provided in the form of a `Dict` that enables the user to only provide icons for a selected number of nodes. Moreover, the user can provide links for types (like `Sink` or `NetworkNode`). An example of this is provided in `examples/EMB_network.jl`.
* Documentation on how to customize icons and colors was added.

### Feature

* You can now use Button4 (used in, *e.g.*, browsers to go back to previous page) to go back to the `TopLevel` of the design (as an alternative to the `Esc` button).
* Double-clicking a node now opens its sub-system.
* Customized labels can now be provided for the different time structures.
* Plot data can now be exported to bit-map formats and to vector formats (.svg and .pdf).
* For `Area`s, an "Expand all" toggle functionality has been added to visualize all sub-systems. All of the topology are drawn in the initializing process of the GUI which optimizes the performance in runtime.
* Added the file `descriptiveNames.yml` which provides more descriptive names for the variables (used in the `ylabel`, `legend` and the Data menu).
* Added functionality to print plotted values to a table in the REPL using the package `PrettyTables`.

## Version 0.3.4 (2024-02-29)

### Adjustment

* Alter description on how examples should be run (use a seperate Project.toml file from the examples folder instead of the test folder).

### Bugfix

* Fixed bug for investments in transition cables not being dashed".

### Enhancement

* Improved component movements responsitivity.
* Added internal types and methods to the documentation.

## Version 0.3.3 (2024-02-26)

### Adjustment

* The labels now only show the node `id` and only used the Base.show function if `id` is a `Number`. Moreover, the type (in parantheses) was removed (this info is now shown on hovering).

### Bugfix

* Fixed legends not properly updating (old legend was not deleted) for `gui.axes[:results]`.

### Enhancement

* Support for RepresentativePeriods added.
* Support for Scenarios added.
* Added Makie inspector functionality such that hovering results axis displays coordinate and hovering topology shows type information.

## Version 0.3.2 (2024-02-23)

### Adjustment

* Changed the routine for finding the icons (icons in other EMX-packages are now expected to be found in ext/EMGUIExt/icons). All EMX-packages are assumed to have name starting with EnergyModels.
* Hide Investment plan, segment and scenarios menus until they are implemented.
* If `idToColorMap` is not provided, a set of colors is created from the default colors to be as distinct as possible.

### Bugfix

* Fixed a bug related to showing results for a Transmission.
* Fixed a bug when dragging a node outside the `gui.axes[:topo]` area.

### Enhancement

* Input data from the case can now be plotted.
* Code readibility was improved for `setupGUI.jl`.
* The tests now loop through all nodes/areas and their available data to check for errors.
* Improved structure of the examples.

## Version 0.3.1 (2024-02-14)

### Bugfix

* Fix CI malfunction resulting from LocalRegistry added in CI. LocalRegistry is now part of test project instead.

## Version 0.3.0 (2024-02-14)

### Adjustment

* The interactive option in the `view()` function has been removed due to lacking usage and maintenance.
* Improved visualization of connections.

### Bugfix

* Fix selection such that clicking on icons images results in node selection.
* Fix bug when selecting a node not having parent that is `:Toplevel`.
* Fix connection lines to be exactly at box boundary.
* Fix bug that assumes that all nodes are connected to an availability node for a `RefArea`.
* Fixed issue relating to reading x and y coordinates from toml file.
* Enabled visualization of sink/source to have more than one input/output.

### Enhancement

* Created a new structure for the GUI that simplifies construction and enables better control of the GUI.
* Open sub system in same axis (not open in a new window) and store plot objects for efficiency.
* Added axis to plot results and provided optional argument for passing the optimization results from `JuMP`
* Added text area to show information on the selected object.
* Improved handling of colors and icons (direct path to icons can be provided, or alternatively names of the .png files which will then have to exist in the icons folder of any of the EMX packages).
* Added tests that checks if the example files runs without errors.

## Version 0.2.0 (2024-01-10)

### Adjustment

Adjusted to changes in `EnergyModelsBase` v0.6.
These changes are mainly:

* All fields of composite types are now lower case.

### Bugfix

* Fix selection such that clicking on icons images results in node selection.
* Fix bug when selecting a node not having parent that is `:Toplevel`.

## Version 0.1.1 (2024-01-09)

### Adjustment

* Make default icon be based on colors instead of icons based on node types.

### Bugfix

* Zooming error due to GeoMakie resolved by deactivating zoom to area action.
* Update xy location of sub-systems when changing location of parent system.
* Removed requirement for an Availability node.
* Fixed bug that prevented more than two nodes to be selected.

### Enhancement

* Improved color handling by having a default behaviour based on the colors provided in the idToColorsMap dictionary
* Improved icon handling by having a default behaviour based on the colors provided. Enhancing users capability to add user defined icons in the idToIconsMap dictionary
* Created a field in EnergySystemDesign named plotObj to store all plotted objects associated with a given design object. This enabled more precise selection of nodes.
* Parameterized many parameters including selection color and scaling of boxes w.r.t. parent nodes
* Adjust limits of the axis to be consistent with a fixed aspect ratio (currently chosen to be 1:1)

### Feature

* An example without an `Availability` node added (based on the source-sink example in `EnergyModelsBase`).
* Provide legends for the available resources for the current system in the upper left corner.
* Added new icons.
* Connections now starts and ends at boundaries of boxes such that every line with arrows ends at the point of an arrow.
* By default, if colors are provided, and if no icons are provided, the "icons" will be represented by geometric shapes based on type and colored by the given resources; Sources has a square shape colored by its resource, Sinks has a circle colored by its resource and Network nodes has a cake diagram structure, where the left cake pieces are colored by the input colors and the right cake pieces are colored by the output colors of the Network node..
* Whenever the root system does not use :areas, use standard coordinates (instead of GeoMakie coordinates).

## Version 0.1.0 (2023-12-08)

* Initial version.
